Topic 1 Finding the lost parents/readme.md, before:

# Finding the lost parents

## Partners
* [Meise Botanic Garden](https://www.plantentuinmeise.be/en/) (MBG) @qgroom
* [Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics](https://www.sib.swiss/) (SIB)
* [Global Biodiversity Information Facility](https://www.gbif.org/) (GBIF)
* [Plazi](http://www.plazi.org/)

## Infrastructures to be used 
* [Global Biodiversity Information Facility](https://www.gbif.org/) (GBIF)
* [Catalogue of Life](https://www.catalogueoflife.org/) (CoL)
* [TreatmentBank](http://plazi.org/resources/treatmentbank/)
* [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main_Page)
* [International Plant Names Index](https://www.ipni.org/)

## Rationale
One of the most important drivers of evolution is hybridization. Hybridization and introgression shuffles alleles to create new combinations that are then tested against the environment and can 
lead to novel combinations. The scientific names of hybrids are numerous and can be found in the Catalogue of Life (COL), [International Plant Names Index](https://www.ipni.org/), the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) Taxonomic Backbone, 
in TreatmentBank and elsewhere, but currently there is no single resource to discover what the parent species of a hybrid are. For example, *Potentilla × pantotricha* Soják is listed in the Catalogue of Life. However, there is no indication within the COL or in other taxonomic resources that it is a hybrid of *P. gorokana* Kalkman and *P. philippinensis* Merr. The only source that reveals the parentage is the original publication (Soják 2003, https://doi.org/10.3372/wi.33.33216).

[Jiří Soják (2003) Some new taxa of Potentilla (Rosaceae) from New Guinea, Asia and Canada (Notes on Potentilla XV.), Willdenowia, 33(2), 409-423](https://bioone.org/journals/willdenowia/volume-33/issue-2/wi.33.33216/Some-new-taxa-of-Potentilla-Rosaceae-from-New-Guinea-Asia/10.3372/wi.33.33216.full)

## Methodology
We propose to parse the parents of hybrids from literature and from taxonomic checklists. Once found these parent names will be linked to the corresponding name within the CoL. We will try to build as long a list of hybrids and names as possible, with the ultimate aim of using these for evolutionary, ecological and taxonomic work. If time permits use these data together with occupancy data from GBIF to calculate the overlap in occupancy between the parents of hybrid taxa.

## Outputs
* A checklist of hybrids and their parent taxa in Darwin Core that is suitable for incorporation into other taxonomic resources.
* Recomendations for matching names to the CoL, IPNI and the GBIF Taxonomic backbone.
* Recomendations for extracting hybrid parents from literature.

## Examples of publications describing hybrids and their parents

1. Bowden, W. M. (1959). The taxonomy and nomenclature of the wheats, barleys, and ryes and their wild relatives. Canadian Journal of Botany, 37(4), 657-684. https://doi.org/10.1139/b59-053
2. Gallo, L. (2012). Natural hybrids in *Sedum* series *Rupestria* Berger (Crassulaceae): a review of taxonomy and nomenclature. https://doi.org/10.3264/FG.2012.0710
3. Groom, Q., Meeus, S., Janssens, S., Leus, L. & Hoste, I. (2021) Hybridization of *Oxalis corniculata* and *O. dillenii* in their non-native range, PhytoKeys 178, pp. 17-30: 17	[*Oxalis x vanaelstii* Hoste, Meeus & Groom](http://tb.plazi.org/GgServer/html/3D6059855F755A24B6622DE1D140E5C5)
4. Smith, G. F. (2020). Taxonomy and nomenclature of *Kalanchoe× laetivirens* (*Crassulaceae* subfam. *Kalanchooideae*), a further invasive nothospecies from Madagascar. Phytotaxa, 460(1), 97-109. https://doi.org/10.11646/phytotaxa.460.1.6
5. Luque-Montes, I., Austin, J. D., Weinfurther, K. D., Wilson, L. D., Hofmann, E. P., & Townsend, J. H. (2018). An integrative assessment of the taxonomic status of putative hybrid leopard frogs (Anura: Ranidae) from the Chortís Highlands of Central America, with description of a new species. Systematics and Biodiversity, 16(4), 340-356. https://doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2017.1415232
6. Kaiser, W. J., Wang, B. C., & Rogers, J. D. (1997). Ascochyta fabae and A. lentis: Host specificity, teleomorphs (Didymella), hybrid analysis, and taxonomic status. Plant disease, 81(7), 809-816. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS.1997.81.7.809
7. Andrews, A. (1960). Taxonomic Notes. XV. The Reciprocal Hybrid of Ditrichum-Pleuridium. The Bryologist, 63(3), 179-181. https://doi.org/10.2307/3241054
8. Kenneth C. Parkes, Still Another Parulid Intergeneric Hybrid (Mniotilta × Dendroica) and Its Taxonomic and Evolutionary Implications, The Auk, Volume 95, Issue 4, 1 October 1978, Pages 682–690, https://doi.org/10.1093/auk/95.4.682
9. Holčík, J., & J. J. Duyvené de Wit. (1962). The Taxonomic Characteristics of Hybrid Rhodeus. Copeia, 1962(4), 777-788. https://doi.org/10.2307/1440679
10. Ford, J. (1974). Taxonomic significance of some hybrid and aberrant-plumaged quail-thrushes. Emu, 74(2), 80-90. https://doi.org/10.1071/MU974080
11. Wagner, W.H., Wagner, F.S. A new natural hybrid in the appalachian asplenium complex and its taxonomic significance. Brittonia 21, 178–186 (1969). https://doi.org/10.2307/2805524
12. Wiegleb, G., Bobrov, A. A., & Zalewska-Gałosz, J. (2017). A taxonomic account of Ranunculus section Batrachium (Ranunculaceae). Phytotaxa, 319(1), 1-55. https://doi.org/10.11646/phytotaxa.319.1.1
13. Long, R. (1966). The Artificial Intersectional Hybrid of the Tropical Species Ruellia brittoniana x R. occidentalis and Its Taxonomic Significance. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club, 93(3), 181-187. https://doi.org/10.2307/2483579
14. Ileana Luque-Montes, James D. Austin, Kayla D. Weinfurther, Larry David Wilson, Erich P. Hofmann & Josiah H. Townsend (2018) An integrative assessment of the taxonomic status of putative hybrid leopard frogs (Anura: Ranidae) from the Chortís Highlands of Central America, with description of a new species, Systematics and Biodiversity, 16:4, 340-356, https://doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2017.1415232

Commit message:

Added IPNI ids where possible, formatted DOI links

Topic 1 Finding the lost parents/readme.md, after:

# Finding the lost parents

## Partners
* [Meise Botanic Garden](https://www.plantentuinmeise.be/en/) (MBG) @qgroom
* [Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics](https://www.sib.swiss/) (SIB)
* [Global Biodiversity Information Facility](https://www.gbif.org/) (GBIF)
* [Plazi](http://www.plazi.org/)

## Infrastructures to be used 
* [Global Biodiversity Information Facility](https://www.gbif.org/) (GBIF)
* [Catalogue of Life](https://www.catalogueoflife.org/) (CoL)
* [TreatmentBank](http://plazi.org/resources/treatmentbank/)
* [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main_Page)
* [International Plant Names Index](https://www.ipni.org/)

## Rationale
One of the most important drivers of evolution is hybridization. Hybridization and introgression shuffles alleles to create new combinations that are then tested against the environment and can 
lead to novel combinations. The scientific names of hybrids are numerous and can be found in the Catalogue of Life (COL), [International Plant Names Index](https://www.ipni.org/), the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) Taxonomic Backbone, 
in TreatmentBank and elsewhere, but currently there is no single resource to discover what the parent species of a hybrid are. For example, *Potentilla × pantotricha* Soják is listed in the Catalogue of Life. However, there is no indication within the COL or in other taxonomic resources that it is a hybrid of *P. gorokana* Kalkman and *P. philippinensis* Merr. The only source that reveals the parentage is the original publication (Soják 2003, https://doi.org/10.3372/wi.33.33216).

[Jiří Soják (2003) Some new taxa of Potentilla (Rosaceae) from New Guinea, Asia and Canada (Notes on Potentilla XV.), Willdenowia, 33(2), 409-423](https://bioone.org/journals/willdenowia/volume-33/issue-2/wi.33.33216/Some-new-taxa-of-Potentilla-Rosaceae-from-New-Guinea-Asia/10.3372/wi.33.33216.full)

## Methodology
We propose to parse the parents of hybrids from literature and from taxonomic checklists. Once found these parent names will be linked to the corresponding name within the CoL. We will try to build as long a list of hybrids and names as possible, with the ultimate aim of using these for evolutionary, ecological and taxonomic work. If time permits use these data together with occupancy data from GBIF to calculate the overlap in occupancy between the parents of hybrid taxa.

## Outputs
* A checklist of hybrids and their parent taxa in Darwin Core that is suitable for incorporation into other taxonomic resources.
* Recomendations for matching names to the CoL, IPNI and the GBIF Taxonomic backbone.
* Recomendations for extracting hybrid parents from literature.

## Examples of publications describing hybrids and their parents

1. Bowden, W. M. (1959). The taxonomy and nomenclature of the wheats, barleys, and ryes and their wild relatives. Canadian Journal of Botany, 37(4), 657-684. doi:[10.1139/b59-053](https://doi.org/10.1139/b59-053)
2. Gallo, L. (2012). Natural hybrids in *Sedum* series *Rupestria* Berger (Crassulaceae): a review of taxonomy and nomenclature. doi:[10.3264/FG.2012.0710](https://doi.org/10.3264/FG.2012.0710) ipni:[urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:77134716-1](https://ipni.org/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:77134716-1)
3. Groom, Q., Meeus, S., Janssens, S., Leus, L. & Hoste, I. (2021) Hybridization of *Oxalis corniculata* and *O. dillenii* in their non-native range, PhytoKeys 178, pp. 17-30: 17	treatmentbank:[*Oxalis x vanaelstii* Hoste, Meeus & Groom](http://tb.plazi.org/GgServer/html/3D6059855F755A24B6622DE1D140E5C5) ipni:[urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:77217160-1](https://ipni.org/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:77217160-1)
4. Smith, G. F. (2020). Taxonomy and nomenclature of *Kalanchoe× laetivirens* (*Crassulaceae* subfam. *Kalanchooideae*), a further invasive nothospecies from Madagascar. Phytotaxa, 460(1), 97-109. doi:[10.11646/phytotaxa.460.1.6](https://doi.org/10.11646/phytotaxa.460.1.6)
5. Luque-Montes, I., Austin, J. D., Weinfurther, K. D., Wilson, L. D., Hofmann, E. P., & Townsend, J. H. (2018). An integrative assessment of the taxonomic status of putative hybrid leopard frogs (Anura: Ranidae) from the Chortís Highlands of Central America, with description of a new species. Systematics and Biodiversity, 16(4), 340-356. doi:[10.1080/14772000.2017.1415232](https://doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2017.1415232)
6. Kaiser, W. J., Wang, B. C., & Rogers, J. D. (1997). Ascochyta fabae and A. lentis: Host specificity, teleomorphs (Didymella), hybrid analysis, and taxonomic status. Plant disease, 81(7), 809-816. doi:[10.1094/PDIS.1997.81.7.809](https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS.1997.81.7.809)
7. Andrews, A. (1960). Taxonomic Notes. XV. The Reciprocal Hybrid of Ditrichum-Pleuridium. The Bryologist, 63(3), 179-181. doi:[10.2307/3241054](https://doi.org/10.2307/3241054)
8. Kenneth C. Parkes, Still Another Parulid Intergeneric Hybrid (Mniotilta × Dendroica) and Its Taxonomic and Evolutionary Implications, The Auk, Volume 95, Issue 4, 1 October 1978, Pages 682–690, doi:[10.1093/auk/95.4.682](https://doi.org/10.1093/auk/95.4.682)
9. Holčík, J., & J. J. Duyvené de Wit. (1962). The Taxonomic Characteristics of Hybrid Rhodeus. Copeia, 1962(4), 777-788. doi:[10.2307/1440679](https://doi.org/10.2307/1440679)
10. Ford, J. (1974). Taxonomic significance of some hybrid and aberrant-plumaged quail-thrushes. Emu, 74(2), 80-90. doi:[10.1071/MU974080](https://doi.org/10.1071/MU974080)
11. Wagner, W.H., Wagner, F.S. A new natural hybrid in the appalachian asplenium complex and its taxonomic significance. Brittonia 21, 178–186 (1969). doi:[10.2307/2805524](https://doi.org/10.2307/2805524)
12. Wiegleb, G., Bobrov, A. A., & Zalewska-Gałosz, J. (2017). A taxonomic account of Ranunculus section Batrachium (Ranunculaceae). Phytotaxa, 319(1), 1-55. doi:[10.11646/phytotaxa.319.1.1](https://doi.org/10.11646/phytotaxa.319.1.1) ipni:[urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:77176576-1](https://ipni.org/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:77176576-1)
13. Long, R. (1966). The Artificial Intersectional Hybrid of the Tropical Species Ruellia brittoniana x R. occidentalis and Its Taxonomic Significance. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club, 93(3), 181-187. doi:[10.2307/2483579](https://doi.org/10.2307/2483579)
14. Ileana Luque-Montes, James D. Austin, Kayla D. Weinfurther, Larry David Wilson, Erich P. Hofmann & Josiah H. Townsend (2018) An integrative assessment of the taxonomic status of putative hybrid leopard frogs (Anura: Ranidae) from the Chortís Highlands of Central America, with description of a new species, Systematics and Biodiversity, 16:4, 340-356, doi:[10.1080/14772000.2017.1415232](https://doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2017.1415232)
